Orthogonal experimental methods

The computational workflows to interpret mass spectrometry data as described above are sophisticated, powerful tools, but also show important limitations and caveats due to their dependence on limited prior knowledge, specific experimental parameters or data quality restraints (see section xyz). 
These inherent biases can give rise to ambiguous or even spurious interpretation of the raw data even when these workflows are applied correctly and to the best of the experimenter’s knowledge. 
Thus, orthogonal validation techniques of discovery proteomic data sets play an important role in validating MS data-driven hypotheses, or iterating and expanding on results obtained by mass spectrometry workflows. 
Oftentimes, researchers will be asked by scientific journals to provide independent orthogonal validation of their proteomics data and not performing orthogonal validation can therefore be a major roadblock in the publication process. 
The aim of validating data obtained by proteomics approaches should always be two-fold by demonstrating that the conclusions arrived at by proteomics are valid and relevant. 
Depending on the question at hand, researchers can draw on a myriad of techniques to validate MS-derived hypotheses in appropriate cellular, organismal or in vitro models. The following paragraphs represent only a high-level, stringent, non-exhaustive selection of orthogonal validation approaches and aims to emphasise the importance of implementing assays that challenge assumptions gained from proteomics data analysis pipelines.
Orthogonal validation of new insights obtained from quantitative proteomics experiments can be a very time-consuming process and often requires familiarity with techniques not directly related to proteomics workflows. 
Given these challenges, the method(s) of choice warrants careful consideration. 
The choice of the orthogonal validation method used is highly context-dependent. Importantly, proteomics experiments in one way or another generally yield comprehensive lists of potentially interesting candidate proteins or pathways, the researcher will have to shortlist candidates to be taken forward to the validation stage of the project. 
Which candidates should you validate by an orthogonal approach and which ones might not require further validation? 
Candidates representing abundant proteins that show good sequence coverage and are detected with very high confidence might not necessarily need extensive orthogonal validation when compared to proteins of intermediate to low abundance that might be more challenging to faithfully quantify by proteomics alone (i.e. many membrane proteins or transcription factors). 
A detailed discussion of the strengths and pitfalls of immunoblotting for validation of semi-quantitative proteomics data can be found an excellent review by Handler et al [@DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201800222].

·       Protein abundance / differential expression measurements
SDS-PAGE + IB
RNA-Seq
SRM / PRM
…
·       Protein-protein interactions / protein complex composition
Co-immunoprecipitation
BN-PAGE
SEC, rate-zonal gradient centrifugation
split-protein systems / protein fragment complementation assays
[@DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.10.014]
Proximity ligation
Proximity labelling (BioID, Turbo-ID)
FRET / BRET
Yeast-Two-Hybrid / Mammalian-Two-Hybrid 
·       Protein posttranslational modifications
o   Oxidative PTMs: [@DOI: 10.1074/jbc.REV119.006217]
o   …
·       Protein conformational changes
o   NMR
o   crystallography, cryo-EM, HDX-MS
o   molecular dynamics simulations

·       Protein localisation (spatial proteomics)

Protein abundance changes / differential protein expression
Protein abundance changes measured by bottom-up proteomics are commonly validated on a protein-to-protein basis using techniques such as immunoblotting analysis or immunofluorescence and immunohistological stainings. The latter also allows for validation of protein expression and localisation in intact tissue or cells. However, these semi-quantitative methods are commonly strongly influenced by the quality of the antibodies used and might not be sufficiently sensitive to detect small changes in protein levels. In this case, more accurate orthogonal quantitation of proteins might be achieved by stable isotope labelling (SILAC/TMT/iTRAQ) and/or SRM/PRM.
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) / protein complex composition
The interaction of a given protein with other proteins determines its function. PPIs can be either mostly static (i.e. core subunits of a protein complex) or dynamic, varying with cellular state (i.e. cell cycle phase or cellular stress responses) or environmental factors (i.e. availability of nutrients, presence of extracellular ligands of cell-surface receptors). Therefore, any given protein can typically bind a range of interaction partners in a spatially and temporally restricted manner, thus forming complex PPI networks (e.g. the interactome of a protein). The choice of methods to probe for altered PPI states depends on the model system (i.e. purified proteins vs complex protein mixtures from cell lysates etc). Most commonly, affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) as well as proximity-dependent labelling approaches (i.e. BioID) with subsequent affinity purification of labelled proteins are used to comprehensively determine protein interactomes. However, these approaches often return multiple potential binding partners, many of which might be artifactual due to loss of cellular compartmentalisation during sample preparation or (in the case of BioID) proteins sharing the same microenvironment without interacting directly. It is therefore necessary to carefully choose appropriate controls and confirm potential novel PPIs, wherever possible, in their native environment using independent approaches. Major caveats of the biological interpretation of affinity-purification based data and possible ways to address them are summarised below.
Non-native interactions due to cell lysis or buffer composition

Gain-/loss-of-function by protein tagging and/or overexpression
Spatial proximity

Capturing transient interactions by crosslinking and proximity labelling 
Split-protein systems / protein fragment complementation assays and FRET / BRET
[@DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.10.014]

Blue-Native PAGE, size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and rate-zonal gradient centrifugation 

Proximity ligation and proximity labelling

Probing for protein conformational changes
Altered accessibility of broad-specificity proteases (i.e. proteinase K) to regions of a native protein can be used as a proxy readout for dynamic structural alterations (see LiP-MS). However, the interpretation of differential cleavage patterns still remains challenging as a range of biological processes can effectively modulate protease accessibility. For instance, differential protease cleavage patterns in a native protein can be affected by a change in its interaction with other proteins or metabolites (occluding or exposing protease cleavage sites), conformational changes, and a host of posttranslational modifications (i.e. phosphorylation). Therefore, orthogonal approaches are necessary to assess which of these possibilities are at the root of any observed ‘structural change’.
Discussed below are multiple methodologies harnessed to further validate and assess structural changes in individual proteins.
